WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Continuing
our theme of national parks,
the Channel Islands National
Park -- they're off the coast
of Southern California -- was
the site of a recent discovery
of part of a Pygmy mammoth, a
species of ancient elephant that
roamed the Earth 13,000 years
ago.
This story was produced
by students from Etiwanda
High School in Southern
California, part of
the "NewsHour"'s
Student Reporting Labs.
It's narrated by rising high
school senior Nick Hinojosa.
NICK HINOJOSA: Off the
California coast lies
Channel Islands National
Park, where archaeological
discoveries are
still being made.
Laura Kirn is the chief of
cultural resources for the
Channel Islands National Park.
LAURA KIRN, Chief of
Cultural Resources, Channel
Islands National Park:
Channel Islands national
park is world-famous
for its archaeology.
Channel Islands really represent
a part of California that
doesn't exist on the mainland
anymore.
And because we don't
have burrowing animals
here, the archaeological
record, the evidence
in the ground is intact.
And that is unheard of.
NICK HINOJOSA: The
preservation of the islands'
archaeology has made it
possible for new artifacts
to be discovered, such as a
mammoth skull excavated in
fall 2016 on Santa Rosa Island.
Monica Bugbee, a preparator and
archaeologist for the mammoth
site in South Dakota, has
begun the painstaking
process of removing the
skull from its plaster cast.
MONICA BUGBEE, Preparator:
This is kind of an
exciting discovery
because Pygmy mammoths,
even though they're really
cool, everybody likes them
because they're small, they're
neat, we actually don't
know a whole lot about them.
This guy was found by a
park service intern who
was doing a stream survey.
So, they were just doing
routine walk down a canyon,
and they happened to notice it.
NICK HINOJOSA: The intern who
discovered the skull, Peter
Larramendy, was a recent college
graduate who recognized the
tusk sticking out of the wall
could be something much more
than just a rock.
LAURA KIRN: He was
part of the excavation.
It was something that you dream
about as a child, discovering
something like a dinosaur
or something really exciting.
NICK HINOJOSA: Don Morris
is a retired archaeologist
for the National Park
Service who aided in
the excavation of
this discovery.
DON MORRIS, National
Park Service: I think
I can confidently say
this is the best skull,
Pygmy mammoth skull, that's
ever come off the island.
Certainly, it's the best
one I have ever seen.
MONICA BUGBEE: This skull
in particular, because
it looks like it might
be in the middle of
the two species, Columbian and
Pygmy, it can give us a much
better idea of how that process
actually worked.
You know, how did they
actually dwarf from
Columbians to Pygmies?
NICK HINOJOSA: Scientists used
radiocarbon dating to discover
how long ago this mammoth
was alive.
This kind of dating is done
by measuring the amount of
carbon-14 in a sample and using
its half-life to calculate
how old the sample is.
MONICA BUGBEE: There was some
charcoal that we found in the
dirt, and we radiocarbon dated
that, and it's about 15,000
years old, I believe, so this
guy's actually pretty young.
NICK HINOJOSA: Justin Wilkins,
a curator at the mammoth site,
has been working with Bugbee
to clean and prepare
the skull for display.
JUSTIN WILKINS, Curator: So
in looking at the past, we can
then access how our species
or other species handled
changes in the environment.
So, we look at the mammoths.
We look at humans.
We also look at a bunch of
small animals to see how those
animals handle these changes,
and then try to decide, predict,
based on the information and
patterns we see from these
specimens, what patterns we're
seeing in the present, how
that's going to change in the
future.
NICK HINOJOSA: Much
of archaeology still
depends on careful
observation and human work.
DON MORRIS: You have
got to move dirt.
You have got to keep your
eyes open and pay attention
to what you're observing.
LAURA KIRN: It's incredibly
exciting to think that
these things are still
out here, they're
still very fragile, and we
want to protect them and
study them in the right ways.
But it doesn't mean that people
can't still discover exciting
new things that happen to
be thousands of years
old on Santa Rosa Island.